# Shapeshifting

Shapeshifting is the transformation of ones body into a different form. Shapeshifting uses transmutation and sympathy. The simplest form of shapeshifting is altering one’s surface appearance as a form of disguise. This could be as simple as changing the length and color of ones hair, or as complex as completely changing one’s face and body shape. Another form of shapeshifting is transforming into an animal. This usually requires some part of the animal in question to act as a sympathetic focus, usually referred to a totem. Because shapeshifting obeys conservation of mass, animal forms that are similar in size to the shapeshifter are preferred.  Shapesifting into an animal usually causes the shapeshifter do gain many of the instincts of that animal. Because the alternate form of a shapeshifter is effectively a magical construct, if a shifted shapeshifter mates with an animal that shares their form, there is a high likelihood that the offspring will have some magical abilities:
* Direbeasts are animals with a human level of intelligence. They are the progeny of animal shapeshifters (most often fae), but do not have the ability to shapeshift. While they have a human level of intelligence, they are limited to animal means of communication, which means that they can have difficulty communicating with humans.
* Natural shapeshifters are any beings (animal or human) that have the inherent ability to take another form, and are often the offspring of arcane shapeshifters. While arcane shapeshifters can generally take multiple forms, natural shapeshifters are usually limited to two forms, based on the true form of each of their parents
The probability of certain results for such pairings are described in the following table:
 
|                      | Natural Shapeshifter                            | Arcane Shapeshifter                         | Direbeast                                       | Natural Animal                              |
|----------------------|-------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Natural Shapeshifter | 12.5% Direbeast <br> 87.5% Natural Shapeshifter | 25% Direbeast <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter | 25% Direbeast <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter     | 25% Direbeast <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter |
| Arcane Shapeshifter  | 25% Direbeast <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter     | 75% Direbeast <br> 25% Natural Shapeshifter | 75% Direbeast <br> 25% Natural Shapeshifter     | 75% Direbeast <br> 25% Natural Shapeshifter |
| Direbeast            | 25% Direbeast <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter     | 75% Direbeast <br> 25% Natural Shapeshifter | 87.5% Direbeast <br> 12.5% Natural Shapeshifter | 75% Direbeast <br> 25% Natural Animal       |
| Natural Animal       | 25% Direbeast <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter     | 75% Direbeast <br> 25% Natural Shapeshifter | 75% Direbeast <br> 25% Natural Animal           | 100% Natural Animal                         |

Even if the shapeshifter is in their natural form, there is still a possibility that their offspring will be natural shapeshifters. This phenomena is responsible for the formation of both the Æl‘fae and Æl‘jinn races. The probability of certain results for such pairings are described in the following table:

|                      | Natural Shapeshifter                          | Arcane Shapeshifter                           | Direbeast\*                                | Natural Animal\*\*                         |
|----------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Natural Shapeshifter | 12.5% Mundane <br> 87.5% Natural Shapeshifter | 25% Mundane <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter     | 25% Mundane <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter | 25% Mundane <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter   |
| Arcane Shapeshifter  | 25% Mundane <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter     | 87.5% Mundane <br> 12.5% Natural Shapeshifter | 90% Mundane <br> 10% Natural Shapeshifter | 95% Mundane <br> 5% Natural Shapeshifter    |
| Direbeast            | 25% Mundane <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter     | 90% Mundane <br> 10% Natural Shapeshifter     | 95% Mundane <br> 5% Natural Shapeshifter  | 100% Mundane                                |
| Natural Animal       | 25% Mundane <br> 75% Natural Shapeshifter     | 95% Mundane <br> 5% Natural Shapeshifter      | 100% Mundane                              | 100% Mundane                                |

\* Includes 'Mundane' descendants of natural shapeshifters.
\*\* Includes humans

The most dramatic example of this phenomena is the AEl’fae, who have become a race of natural shapeshifters over the course of several centuries. There are also a few more recent groups of natural shapeshifters descended from groups powerful arcane shapeshifters and unrelated to the 'fae. Based on how natural shapeshifting abilities form in shapeshifter populations, it takes about 100-200 years for a group of (rather prolific) arcane shapshifters to become primarily natural shapeshifters.

The most difficult types of shapeshifting are multiform shapeshifting and elemental shapeshifting. With either of these types of shapeshifting, the shapeshifter must use animancy to preserve their mind and essence, as they do not have a proper body to reside in. Consequently, these types of shapeshifting are limited to very powerful mages, liches, and other immortals, who are already capable of preserving their soul outside of their natural body. Conversely, most elemental or multiform shapeshifters are necessarily immortals as they must be capable of preserving their soul outside of their natural body.
With multiform shapeshifting, the shapeshifter splits into numerous small animals, such as a swarm or rats or a flock of birds. The shapeshifter has some degree of control over each of these creatures. The Queen of Ravens is a (incredibly powerful) multiform shapeshifter. 
With elemental shapeshifting, the shapeshifter transforms their body into some inorganic substance, such as stone, fire, water or smoke, but are still able to move, use magic, and communicate. All Æl’jinn are elemental shapeshifters.
One other type of shapeshifting is partial shapeshifting, where the shapeshifter only transforms part of their body, or forms a shape halfway between their natural form and the form of another animal. This requires more skill and control than conventional animal shapeshifting, but is still much easier than multiform or elemental shapeshifting.
Mages specializing in Shapeshifting are referred to as Shapeshifters or Arcane Shapeshifters (to differentiate them from natural shapeshifters). Shapeshifters are split fairly evenly among learned and instinctive shapeshifters (Not counting the ‘fae and other natural shapeshifters). Learned shapeshifters are generally capable of taking more forms then instinctive shapeshifters, as well as being more skilled at taking partial forms. Shapeshifters who specialize in simple alterations to their appearance, or other forms of human-to-human shapeshifting are generally learned shapeshifters. Instinctive shapeshifters tend to have a better mastery of a single animal form, including a better control over the instincts of their alternate form, and the ability to shift between forms faster than most learned shapeshifters. Inexperienced instinctive shapshifters require an animal totem to shapeshift, but most experienced instinctive shapeshifters are capable of shapeshifting without a totem. Most learned shapeshifters always require a totem to shapeshift.

Mages who shapeshift frequently age at about half the rate they would age naturally.
 
Animal-Human hybrids sometimes occur as the offspring of Chimeric fae or partial shapeshifters. They are usually sterile.

Skinsifters are blood-magic shapeshifters that essentially inhabit/posses the corps of a deceased animal. This allows them to take larger forms than is possible with conventional shapeshifting.

Transmutation can also be used to alter the form of living things other than oneself. This is generally more difficult than shapeshifting. Many High Fae and other powerfull learned shapeshifters are skilled at this, and have created a number of magical creatures that still inhabit the land, including Oozes and Chimera.