# Magic

## Arcana

Arcana is the energy drawn upon to accomplish feats of magic. Generally
cannot be directly interacted with, but required for all spells.
Disruptions in Arcana will temporarily disable persistent magical
effects, but will not likely have any other detrimental effects on
magical items or entities. Arcana repels itself and will therefore tend
to spread fairly evenly across an area. Consequently, any item
enchanted to store arcane will slowly leak energy to its surroundings,
and this effect will be more significant in an area with little Arcana.
Arcana is also naturally attracted to higher energy regions, such as
living beings, rivers, fault lines, volcanoes, etc. This results in a
fairly complex distribution of magical energies across any given region.

## Aether

Aether is the driving force behind active magical effects, the medium
used in enchanting, and the 'path' used by sympathetic effects. Aether
is directly manipulated by magic users to create magical effects
('spells'). Disruptions to Aether can cause catastrophic magical
effects, spontaneously create magical effects and elementals, and
drastically disrupt spellcasting and active magical effects.
A magical 'force' can be applied to the Aether to draw Arcana towards a spellcaster in order to provide energy for a spell.

The power of a mage is proportional to the range from which he or she
can draw arcana from, which is equivalent to the area that he or she
can affect directly.

## Schools of Magic

The practice of magic is divided into 9 schools. Each school is further
classified as Physical, Ethereal, or Arcane. Physical Magic involves
the manipulation of matter and energy. The Schools of Physical Magic
are Evocation, Channeling, and Transmutation. Ethereal Magic involves
the manipulation and observation of unseen or unreal forces. The
Schools of Ethereal Magic are Scrying, Psionics, and Animancy. Arcane
Magic involves the manipulation and usage of magic itself. The Schools
of Arcane Magic are Encantation, Sympathy, and Enchanting.

### Evocantion

Evocation is the creation and absorption of matter and energy.
Evocation is generally limited to small-scale effects, as all energy
for the spell must come directly from Arcana. Evocation tends to be
'faster' to cast than comparable channeling or transmutation effects,
and is therefore useful for reactive spells. It is also useful for
small effects that supplement more complex spells, such as generating a
spark to ignite a fireball, or creating certain precise light patterns
for a physical illusion.

### Channeling

Channeling is the transport of matter and energy from one place to
another. Effects achieved through channeling must obey conservation of
energy and momentum (One exception to this rule is teleportation, which
tends to break potential energy). Channeling is useful for focusing
large but diffuse energy sources such as ambient heat, and for
diverting energy around or past an object. This can be used to divert
light around oneself to achieve invisibility, and to project sounds or
images of existing objects to other nearby locations. More powerful
spellcasters can use channeling for teleportation.

### Transmutation

Transmutation is the transformation of matter and energy from one form
into another. The greater the dissimilarity between the two forms, the
more difficult the transmutation is. In addition, more complex
materials are more difficult to transmute. Transmutation is often used
for spells requiring a material that is not present, such as supplying
fuel to a fireball spell. Transmutation is also one of the primary
components of shapeshifting. 

### Scrying

Scrying is the observation of that which is unseen or far away. It can
be used to sense magic and energy, and see through walls or other
barriers. It can also be used to observe the past, present, future, or
far away places, but this usually requires a sympathetic link to what
you are trying to see, and scrying the future is always difficult and
unreliable.

### Psionics

Psionics is the reading and manipulation of the mind. Psionics can be
used to view the thoughts or senses of another being, as well as
project ones thoughts or senses into the mind of another being. It can
be used to influence the mind of another by projecting emotions or
compulsions, and can be used for mind control, although this is quite
difficult. Psionics is also used for the creation of mental illusions.

### Animancy

Animancy is the manipulation of an entities soul or life essence. It
can be used to travel outside of ones body in an invisible and
incorporeal form. Animancy is also used to help maintain ones identity
when shapeshifting into another form. 
Animancy is used to bind souls or soul echoes into undead and
constructs in order to animate them. The manipulation of souls other
than ones own or the souls of the recently dead is extremely difficult.
Animancy can also be used in conjunction with psionics and encantation
to bind the soul of one entity into the service of another.

### Encantation

Encantation is used to directly manipulate Arcana (magical power) or
Aether (magical media). It can be used to attract or repel Arcana, and
to disrupt or prevent magical effects.

### Sympathy

Sympathy is enables spells using the relationships between physical
things. Sympathy can be used to link two similar objects, link part of
an object with the rest of it, or link an object with its past or
future. 
This also useful for targeting long distance spells such as
teleportation or scrying using some part of the target. Sympathy can
also be used to copy or extrapolate the structure of an object. This
can be used to simplify complex spells such as shapeshifting (by
interpolating the full physiology of an animal from a piece of bone) or
healing (by linking to the past state of the targets body). 
When using Sympathy to supplement channeling, evocation, or
transmutation that involves the manipulation of some form of energy, a
good sympathetic focus is an object that has experienced the same kind
of energy. For example, diamionds and igneous/metamorphic rocks are
good focci for heat spells.
Metals tend to be good sympathetic focci for general encantation and enchanting spells.
For scrying, fire is a good focus for future sight, earth for past
sight, and water and air are good for distance sight (water generally
gives a clearer vision while air tends to have a longer and broader
range). Molten rock is a very strong scrying focus as it combines all
the attributes of these four elements. Glass or reflective surfaces are
good for revealing hidden things.

### Enchanting

Enchanting is used to bind magical effect into objects. There are three
basic subtypes of enchantment: Triggered enchantments, template
enchantments, and permanent or ongoing enchantments.
Triggered enchantments store a single spell that takes effect when
triggered. This can include single-use scrolls, certain potions, and
single use magical traps.
Template enchantments are used to store an imprint of a spell, which
allows another mage to cast that spell without having prior knowledge
of the spell (The mage must still supply all energy for the spell).
Many wands have this kind of enchantment, and most spellbooks also
include template enchantments of all spells contained within.
Permanent enchantments are ongoing effects that function independently
from the caster. These enchantments can either draw Arcana from their
surroundings (in which case they will be limited in power by the
availability of ambient Arcana), or can be provided with a certain
amount of arcane upon creation (in which case they will have a limited
duration). A simple example of this sort of enchanting would be a
permanent magical light source, perhaps using transmutation to convert
heat into light. 
Most powerful artifacts tend to use some form of permanent enchantment,
sometimes combined with trigger or template effects. These type of
enchantments tend to be very complicated to create, and equally
difficult to alter or undo. 
There is also a subset of permanent enchantments that are
self-replicating. This includes magical afflictions such as
lycanthropy, as well as hereditary curses. These kinds of enchantments
use a permanent enchantment to handle the basic effects, and use an
integrated template enchantment in order to replicate.

