---
layout: default
permalink: /culture/races/aeldar/aelfae
---

# Æl'fae

The original Æl'fae were a group of nomadic Ældar skilled in animal
shapeshifting. Modern Æl'fae are nomadic natural shapeshifters, who can
shapeshift between a human form and a single animal form. Æl'fae most
often live in small family groups (5-15 individuals). A single family
of 'fae will generally have the same or similar animal form. Lone
'fae are also fairly common.
Æl'fae have an average lifespan of 30-50 years. They reach physical
maturity at age 9-10 if born in human form, or age 3-4 if born in
animal form, although they do not reach their full size until around
age 12 - 16 (regardless of birth form). They usually manifest
shapeshifting abilities shortly before they reach physical maturity.
All types of Æl'fae tend to adopt many of the mannerisms and behaviors
of the animal forms they favor. Æl'fae do not have any spoken language.
Instead, they communicate using a complex combination of vocalizations
and body language similar to that used by the forms they favor (with
some modifications for expressing more complex concepts). This allows
for communication between 'fae who are in animal forms, 'fae in human
forms, and direbeasts. Different groups of 'fae (with different animal
forms) can usually understand each other reasonably well. Some of the
more civilized 'fae tribes can also speak the common human language of
the region, and most High fae can speak a wide range of languages.
The biological cycles of 'fae (and an other magical shapeshifter) tend
to match whatever form they are in (although shapeshifting while in
heat will generally retain such a state). Note that shapeshifting while
pregnant is virtually impossible. Animal-form 'fae pregnancies tend to
produce smaller litters than in natural animals. 
Æ'fae social practices are usually modeled on those of the animal form
they favor, in part because human social practices are so varied.

There are three main 'fae bloodlines, each originating from a different group of Ældar:

## Plains Tribes (Daal'fae)

Originating from the Æl'daal, and inhabit the savannah and jungle
regions of central Eaos. Consist of various nomadic tribes, each with
its own patron animal. Tribes include Jackal, Hyena, Gazelle, Deer and
Lion. Daal'fae usually retain a mostly human form, which is similar in
appearance to the ÆL'daal, but may have some animal characteristics
such as antlers, slit-pupil eyes, fangs, or elongated ears
They live in semi-nomadic tribes. As there are several different
daal'fae bloodines, individual social structures vary. However, most
Daal'fae tribes are nomadic and matriarchal, with a somewhat dynamic
membership. Most groups are polygamous, with few long-term
relationships. 

## Deer Tribes - Deer, Gazelle, Antelope, etc.

Deer tribes generally consist of a group of related females plus one or
more mature males. In addition, the tribe includes all juveniles born
to the tribe, and any elder males past breeding age. The tribe is led
by an alpha female, and defended by any adult males. Tribes consist of
10 to 40 individuals. While the female component of the tribe remains
fairly constant, the adult male members change fairly frequently. When
juvenile males reach maturity, they leave their tribe. Solitary males,
or small groups of young males are fairly common. While nomadic, deer
'fae often carry a fair number possessions, namely medicines, tents,
and similar supplies. This is usually carried in saddlebags on the back
of deer-form 'fae, or backpacks for human form 'fae. Some groups,
especially those with frequent contact with human settlements, may
carry wagons, or caravans with them. Tools, dwellings, and wagons are
primarly crafted from plant matter or minerals &#8211; cedar, cotton, flax,
bamboo, and flint. They often harvest and cultivate wild plants,
grains, and spices (saffron?) while browsing, and trade these with
human settlements.

## Lion Tribes

Lion tribes are quite similar in composition to Deer tribes, consisting
of a group of (usually related) females, their juvenile offspring and
one or two males. Lion tribes are usually slightly smaller than Deer
tribes, consisting of 10 to 20 individuals. As with the Deer tribes,
juvenile males leave the tribe when they reach maturity. Adult males
are responsible for defending the tribe, while females do most of the
hunting. Lion tribes are less nomadic than Deer tribes, usually
sticking to an established territory. They often have a permanent
settlement within their territory, generaly a fortified cave or network
of treehouses. Lion 'fae tend to have much less contact with human
settlements than Deer fae.

## Hyena Tribes

Hyena 'fae form large tribes of related females and their offspring,
plus several unrelated adult males. Hyena tribes are matriarchal, with
a strong dominance hierarchy. Female members are always dominant over
make members. When juvenile males reach maturity, they leave the tribe.
Hyena 'fae tribes tend to be fairly large, consisting of 20 - 80
individuals. Clans are semi-nomadic, often constructing temporary
dwellings that they use for a few months to a few years, before moving
onto a new location (usually due to environmental concerns, such as
better hunting, less competition, etc.). Hyena dwellings are
constructed from clay, packed earth, and/or wattle and daub, and
consist of a network of interconnected rooms, trenches, and tunnels,
generally below ground level. (Although some rooms are open to the air).

## Canid Tribes - Jackals, Coyotes, and Red Wolves

Canid tribes consist of a single mating pair and their juvenile
offspring. Unlike other Daal'fae tribes, Canids are monogamous. Canid
tribes are semi-nomadic, ranging through the spring and summer months,
and finding or building a permanent den over the fall and winter
(revise this - no seasons). As they consist of only a single family
group, canid tribes are quite small, consisting of 2 to 8 individuals.

Direbeasts (usually family members of the tribe) of this animal also
tend to follow the tribe. Daal'fae tribes tend to be about 70% natural
shapeshifters, 20% direbeasts, and 10% non-shapeshifter humans.
Daal'fae tribes exist on most continents, and represent a wide array of
animals (Which are usually similar in size to a human). Daal'fae
sometimes trade with humans. Daal'fae are generally on good terms with
any local wild fae. There exist Daal'fae tribes of all of the major
'fae bloodlines.

## Wolf Clans

Originating from the Æl'midh, inhabit the forested regions near the
territories of the Æl'midh and the northerneastern reaches of the
Æl'daal territories. Many of the clans have good relations with the
local Æl'midh and Æl'daal. Wolf 'fae look similar to 'midh when in
their human form, but tend to be somewhat darker skinned. 
Clans consist of a single extended family, with one primary mating pair
(This equates to an Alpha couple, their parents and grandparents,
various single siblings, uncles, and cousins). This gives packs of 6-10
individuals. Parents and grandparents generally stay with the pack of
their oldest child, with younger children leaving to form their own new
packs. Established packs have a fixed territory, such that single elder
children usually encounter wandering wolves (who are second children or
younger) as potential mates. This practice helps to avoid dominance
strugles that could result if the eldest children of two established
packs were to join. Wolf fae are generally monogamous, and mate for
life. Inheritance (mainly of property) is through the first child.
Second and younger children may inherit posessions and heirlooms when
they leave the pack. Wolf 'fae generally dwell in extensive cave
systems. Their dwellings hae a fairly communal layout. These caves tend
to have elaborately carved pillars and walls, and are furnished
primarily with fur rugs. Within their caves they may take human or wolf
form, but are almost always in wolf form when they leave their caves.
When in human form, they will often wear simple fur wraps and cloaks,
with clasps made of carved bone. They will use stone or iron knives for
skinning their prey when they want furs (most often deer or rabbits,
but sometimes foxes, and occasionally bears) , and often trade furs to
the 'daal and 'midh. They usually eat meat raw, but will smoke and salt
excess meat to provide a backup food supply in the winter when prey is
scarce. Wolf 'fae packs are comprised of 75% natural shapeshifters and
25% direbeasts.

## Xhal'fae 

Originating from the Æl'xhal, inhabit the jungle in the northwestern
reaches of Xuon and the nearby islands. Comprised of various feline
tribes (jaguars, leopards, tigers). Most Xhal'fae take on a humanoid
form, but with notable animal features. They are competent
shapeshifters, but tend to use this ability to optimize their shape to
the current situation rather than taking on a purely human or animal
form, although they are still able to do so.
Xhal'fae care little for modesty regardless of what shape they are in,
and will hunt, kill, and eat just about anything that is not 'fae. Most
Xhal'fae do not wear clothing, use tools, or build structures. 
Xhal'fae 'clans' consist of a loosely organized group of individuals.
Clan members tend to have their own dwelling, be it a cave, crevice,
treetop nest, rudimentary hut or lean-to, or portion of ruins. In case
of outside threats, the group will usually elect a warleader (generally
through physical competition) but otherwise clans have no specific
leader. 
Xhal'fae are polygamous and rather prolific. Romantic relationships
usually consist of heterosexual pairs, but may consist of larger groups
as well. Relationships generally don't last longer than a few months to
a year, and may or may not result in a child, although longer
relationships are not unheard of. As with most natural cat species,
mothers usually raise their children alone (in part for the safety of
the children) although may be assisted by other females.
All 'fae are competent hunters. Some have other specialized skills,
including herbalists, craftspeople, and shamans. Unlike most other fae
clans, Xhal'fae tribes often include several different feline species. 
There are some slightly more 'civilized' tribes of Xhal'fae on the
northeastern outskirts of the jungle. These 'fae often craft and wear
jewelry made of gold, bronze, and various semiprecious stones, and live
in modified ruins. Most Xhal'fae 'cities' are built in leftover Uon
ruins, and many Xhal'fae groups simply live in the wilderness.
Xhal'fae look similar to the 'xhal when they are in their human form.
Xhal'fae tribes tend to be about 70% natural shapeshifters, 20%
direbeasts, and 10% non-shapeshifter humans, although the
non-shapeshifter humans tend to have animalistic features similar to
the preferred half-forms of their parents.
Other 'fae
There are also a few small groups of unique 'fae not directly related to any of the major bloodlines:

Selkies: A few clans of seal shapeshifters in the far north. Culturally
similar to inuit. Most similar to the 'midh and wolf fae.

Merfae: Serpentfish shapeshifters most often found around the 'xhal
islands. Often use a half-form with a fishlike tail and a humanlike
body. Relatively civilized for fae, often wear jewelry and wield
fishing spears or tridents. Most similar to the 'xhal and Xhal'fae

Deep Fae: An offshoot of the Daal'fae, these 'fae live northeast of the
Dragonspine mountains, and rarely come into contact with civilized
races. They spend most of their time in full animal form and rarely
take human form. For the most part they are indistinguishable from
direbeasts. Deep Fae tribes are about 30% natural shapeshifters and 70%
direbeasts. Tribes include Deer, Cougar, Bear, and Wolf. The Queen of
Ravens makes her home in the territory of the Deep Fae.

High fae
High fae are incredibly powerful fae capable of taking any number of
forms at will. High fae are effectively immortal due to their
shapeshifting magic, and generally have no 'true' form, although often
have a preferred form. High fae are quite rare, and most are from the
age of the Ældar, before the modern fae tribes were formed, and as such
are rather different than modern fae. 


