---
layout: default
permalink: /world/bestiary/elementals/furies
---

# Furies (Spirit Elementals)

Furies (Spirit Elementals) are formed when a spirit fuses with an
elemental. Most commonly occurs when a dynamic elemental kills
something. The spirit component means that furies are generally more
inteligent and more hostile than regular elementals. Furies can also be
created artifically by a mage from a spirit and an elemental. Ascendend
furies are rare, but possible.

Skull Furies - The most common type of fury. Skull furies take the
appearance of a dynamic elemental in the approximate shape of whaterver
spirit they are fused with, and contain the skull or partial skeleton
of that creature. Skull furies are similar to a dynamic
elementals in behavior, but smarter, more aggressive, and will actively
hunt other living things.
Skull furies are not recommended for use as a familiar, as the fused
minds of the elemental and the spirit have the tendancy to absorb or
drive insane the bound mind of the mage. However, necromantically
created skull furies can have contraints (eg. stay in a certain area,
ignore certain people) placed on them, making them powerfull guardians.
Skull furies were often used as guardians by the ancient Ael. Many of
these guardians lie dormant in ancient tombs, only activating when an
intruder passes by.

Note: Skull Furies are the single most dangerous hostile force or
creature commonly encountered in the land. Other, stronger dangers
exist (Such as liches or dragons), but they tend to be rarer.

Pestilence Fury: A fairly rare type of fury than tends to occur when a
pestilence elemental (which are themselves quite rare) takes a certain
number of victims. Comprised of the origional elemental plus the
spirits and remains of many of its victims. Powerful, malevolent, and
very difficult to deal with.

Kelpie (Drowning Fury): Created when a creature is drowned by a river
elemental (accidentally or not). Takes the form of a waterlogged corpse
or skeleton, entangled in river weed. Remains around the location where
it drowned, and attemts to drown anyone who ventures near, often
entangling them in river weed and dragging them to their death.

Dryad Furies: Created when a dryad kills something. Since dryads are
guardians and protectors of their domain this is usually a hostile
intruder, most often a human but sometimes a stampeding animal or large
beast such as a wyrm or dragon. Dryad furies are rare, but extremely
dangerous and of comparble power level to a greater lich.



