# Elementals

## Static magical phenomena:

* Domains

The simplest type of elemental. Includes zones of darkness or sourceless light, heat, cold, etc.

## Simple reactive phenomena:

* Wisps

Small elemental effects that drift aimlessly. Examples include flame, light, wind, freezing cold, wandering stones, etc.

## Lurkers

Static or mobile effects that only produce an effect upon some
stimulus. Eg a ligning bolt that strikes whenever anything passes
nearby, a clif that crumbles and reforms, etc.

## Static Elementals

Elementals that embody a physical object or place. Not very
intelligent, but quite stubborn. Tend towards maintaining or organizing
that which they embody. Examples include stone, hill, or mountain
elementals, tree or forest elementals, etc.
Static elementals are non-hostile and tend to ignore other beings. They
are not dangerous unless you get in their way. Static elementals
make decent familiars because they are easily influenced or controlled.
Wanderers

Low intelligence. Generally just wander aimlessly.
Can include islands or reefs that travel the oceans. Many of the
riftscape floating islands are wandering elementals. Other wanderes
include earthen giants.
Artisans
Somewhat more intelligent than wanderers, but very single-minded.
Tend towards maintaining or organizing
that which they embody. Forest artisans often result in forests
arranged in oddly specific patterns. Stone artisans arrange standing
stones or cairns. 

## Dynamic Elementals

Elementals that embody a physical process. Fairly intelligent, and
naturally act towards propagating/instigating the process they embody.
Usually fairly dangerous. Examples include fire, rust, decay, weather,
pollination, avalanches, pestilence, tides, rivers, etc. (River
elementals are most often dynamic, while lake elementals are usally
static, although this is not set in stone).
Dynamic elementals also make fairly good familiars, as they tend to be
quite powerful and are rather more intelligent than conventional
elementals.

### Tenders

Natural processes that require external intervention. Polination, Tides, Seasons, Weather, Rust, Decay, etc.

### Keepers

Stationary dynamic processes. River elementals

### Storms

Uncontrolled dynamic elementals. Usually burn out fairly quickly. Avalanches, pestilence, forest fires, etc. 
Furies

## Hybrid undead/elementals.

## Concept Elementals

Concept elementals are magically more similar to spirits than other
elementals. They embody ideas, beliefs or feelengs rather than physical
places or processes.

## Daemons and Cambions

Emotional elementals (daemons) are created in places of intense
emotion. They usually take the form of an intangible humanoid spirit,
as most emotions are generated by humans. They cause proliferation of
the emotion they embody. Emotionall elementals can and do posses
humans. This is known as a Cambion. Cambions, in addition to their
emotional aura and any natural abilities of their body, they have
enhanced physical and psychic abilities. They also use illusion
abilites to alter their appearance. Powerfull Cambions are immune to
aging. 
Emotional elementals are fairly rare, and most often manifest as cambions.

  * Nightmares - Fear daemons. Unlike most daemons, often do not appear in a humanoid form.
  * Succubi - Lust/Sex daemons.  
  * Inferni - Rage/Wrath daemons.
  * Algoth - Despair/Deppression daemons. One of the most dangerous daemons, along with Inferni.

While less common, daemons of positive emotions do exist (eg. Love - Deva?).

Note: Daemons are sometimes summoned by cults in a bid for easy power.
This usually doesn't end well for the cult, but usually results in a
cambion. This ritual does not require a lot of power, just a
lot of emotionally charged followers.

Weaker cambions are usually temporary, and may manifest as
psychological disorders. Stronger cambions tend to be a force to be
reckoned with, and may persist for several centuries.

## Heroes

"Heroes" - Heroic figures idolized in folktale and legend, that take on
a physical form. Tend to be idealized humans, and usually form after
the death of the person who inspiried them, although may form before,
in which case they merge with that person.

## Gods

"Gods" - Similar to "Heroes". Many ascended tend to meld with god elementals. Draw power from belief.

High ElementalsHigh elementals include any elementals that can be considered sapient.
These include Gyldraed, Vylderythe, and Greater Elementals.

## Ancients

Greater elementals are essentially conventional elementals that are
intelligent and have massive and powerful forms, such as mountains,
hurricanes, or ocean currents. They are rare, and generally lie dormant
for centuries at a time.

### Gyldraed

Gyldraed are manifestations of a distinctive and enduring location such
as an ancient forest grove, mountain peak, spring, lake, valley,
crystal cavern, etc. They generally take a humanoid or animal form
crafted from the material of their domain. The actual form of a
Gyldraed technically includes their entire domain; as such it is
impossible to separate or even distinguish between a Gyldraed from its
domain. Consequently, they are able to sense anything within their
domain, manifest anywhere within it and exert some measure of control
over it. Their life force is directly linked to the well being of their
domain; if a Gyldraed's domain is destroyed or desecrated, they will
weaken and die. Gyldraeds act as guardians and caretakers of their
domain and its residents.

### Vyldarche

Vyldarche are smaller elementals of humanlike size and intelligence.
They are primarily wanderers that constantly seek out new places and
experiences. Of all elementals, Vyldarche are the only ones that have
regular interactions with other sapient races.

