---
layout: default
---

# Undead

In addition to elementals, there are a variety of magical entities
created from some already existing being. This category has three
subclasses:

## Imprinted

This class comprises entities that are the imprint or magical memory of
a once living being. Such entities will behave similar to how they did
in life, but have no actual soul or guiding intelligence, and are
instead guided by the memory of instinct or habit. The major effective
difference between Imprinted and Soulbound is that Imprinted cannot
learn.

## Soulbound

This class includes beings whose soul has been bound to the mortal
plane upon their death. Soulbound retain all knowledge, skills and
abilities they had in life, and are fundamentally the same person as
they where when alive.

## Ascended

Ascended are beings that have surpassed mortal constraints through
magical means. They are similar to soulbound, except that they tend
have access to much greater knowledge and power than when they were
mortal. Generally, Soulbound have been created by another mage, whereas
Ascended have achieved immortality though their own power. 

True ascended (Ael'syi) are not bound to a single corporeal form
(unlike liches), but can manifest or create avatars of themselves.
Because they do not have a centralized body or phylactry, true ascended
are virtually impossible to kill, and at least as difficult to create.

The term Ael'syi technically refers to ascended Aeldar, but is commonly
used as a term for all demigods/ascended. This is partly due to the
fact that most demigods are ascended Aeldar. There are no ascended Uon
(their first attempt at this caused the Riftscape Cataclysm). In
addition to Aeldar, there are a few ascended dragons (Although
differentiating between true ascended dragons and mere spirits or
liches can be quite difficult due to the immense amount of power
dragons naturally command), and many of the greater elementals are
considered to be demigods.

Among these three classes there are three different categories:

## Ethereal Undead

Ghosts and Spirits are invisible, incorporeal entities, which manifest
to living beings using limited psionic abilities. Spirits can also be
detected by anyone with some degree of magical sight. They most often
occur naturally but can also be artificially induced by a mage
sufficiently skilled in animancy. Spirits of sapient beings are most
common, but animal spirits can exist as well. Natural ethereal undead
are most often bound to places or objects. Powerful spirits bount to a
location may also be the result of a (failed) attempt at ascending. In
very rare cases, a spirit elemental can form if a natural spirit forms
coincident to an elemental and the two entities merge. This results in
an elemental with the traits and general appearance of the undead.

An imprinted ethereal is referred to as a ghost. Unlike zombies, ghosts
occur naturally fairly often, most frequently upon violent, traumatic,
or untimely deaths. Ghosts use weak psionic abilities to manifest to
living things. This manifestation can be anything from a feeling of
being watched, to persistent nightmares, to realistic illusions. More
powerful ghosts can occasionally accomplish minor feats of telekinesis.
Ghosts are more likely to manifest to beings that knew them when they
were alive.

A soulbound ethereal is called a spirit. Spirits can choose who they
manifests to, and are often capable of minor telekinetic feats. Spirits
are significantly rarer than ghosts, but can still form naturally.
Powerful mages will often leave behind spirits when they die, whether
unexpectedly or not.

Only extremely powerful magic users skilled in animancy can become
ascended ethereal. They retain all the magical skill and knowledge they
had in life, but can access a virtually unlimited amount of magical
power (Arcana), and can travel almost anywhere instantaneously. Such
entities are extremely rare and incredibly powerful. Since they have no
physical body, they are also virtually impossible to destroy.

Guardian Spirits - Hybrid Spirit/Concept elemental occasionally created
when someone sacrifices themselves to protect another. Results in the
spirit being bound to the person they are protecting, and empowered
with rather stronger physical powers than your average spirit.

## Physical Undead

Physical undead are reanimated corpses. They are most often created by
necromancers, although in rare cases can occur naturally. As with
ethereal undead, physical undead of any sort of animal can exist.

An imprinted physical undead is called a zombie. The skills and
abilities tend to be somewhat less effective than in life. However,
since they have no guiding intelligence, they are easy to control
magically. If a zombie is reanimated without being bound to the will of
a necromancer, it will often try to return to any pervading routine
that it had in life, or alternatively do nothing and fade back into
death. Most necromancers prefer to use the bodies of people when
creating zombies, because they understood and followed commands in
life, and thus their imprints are better able to follow commands in
undeath (Compared to animal zombies, who tend to behave instinctually
when reanimated). However, zombie steeds are fairly common, and the
zombies of large or aggressive animals are sometimes used as guards.

A soulbound physical undead is known as a revenant. Revenants are very
difficult to create, and can generally only be created at the instant
of death. A revenant maintains the free will it had in life.
Consequently, necromancers tend to prefer to use zombies, which are
easier to control. 

An ascended physical undead is known as a lich, and is created when a
magic-user intentionally binds his or her soul to their body in order
to achieve a form of immortality. A lich retains all the skills and
powers they had in life, and are incredibly difficult to permanently
destroy. 

A lich is different from a revenant in that it is self induced, rather
than externally induced. Liches can manipulate their own enchantments,
and regenerate damage, whereas revenants cannot, making liches much
more difficult to destroy.

## Infused Items

Objects with a soul (human, elemental or other) bound into them. Such
items take on the power and some of the magical traits of the entity
bound into them, although using this power is unpredictable and subject
to the will of the spirit. This can happen naturally and accounts for
about 20% of natural undead. An object infused with an elemental can be
used to 'summon' the elemental.
