---
layout: default
permalink: /culture/races/
---


# Races

text

## Ældar

The Ældar were a race of magically gifted humans who originated about
200,000 years ago in central Eaos. lived between 100,000 and 10,000 BC.
Ældar resembled stocky, swarthy humans with brown or black hair and
eyes. The Ældar civilization rose to prominence on the southwestern
continent around 50,000 BC, and gradually spread across most of the
known world. The Ældar civilization was primarily agricultural, and
relied one stone or bronze tools. However, many advanced feats of
engineering were accomplished through magical means. By 10,000 BC, the
Ældar civilization had divided into separate civilizations, which were
the precursors to the modern human races. These are:

  * Æl'fae: Nomadic natural shapeshifters
  * Æl'jinn: Elemental shapeshifters
  * Æl'mið: Northern miners, smiths, enchanters.
  * Æl'daal: Eastern humans.
  * Æl'thal: Western empire.
  * Æl'xhal: Tribal islanders, closely related to the Æl'khal.

## Uon

The Uon diverged from the same common ancestor Ældar about 100,000
years ago. Early in their evolution, the Uon developed potent
telepathic abilities that eventually defined their culture and
appearance. Around 50,000 years ago, the Uon had developed a collective
consciousness spanning their entire race, and the Uon physiology had
become substantially different than that of the Ældar. Around 2000 BC,
the rapidly growing civilizations of the Uon and the Æl'daal came into
contact with one another. Conflict between the Uon and the Æl'daal
continued over the next 2000 years, with the Uon gradually gaining
territory on the western continent. The Uon civilization was completely
wiped out when an attempt to create an artificial god/racial power
source. This caused a magical overload across the Uon race, and threw
the magical energies of the region into chaos, creating the riftscape. 

## Dragons

Dragons look like large winged lizards. They have a long neck and tail,
four legs with opposable claws on each foot, and a pair of batlike
wings. Most dragons are skilled sorcerers, and often use magic to
appear to 'breathe' elemental blasts like fire or ice. Dragons tend to
be quite intelligent. All dragons have a tendency towards hoarding,
although individual dragons will hoard different things. Many dragons
hoard gems, gold, or wealth, but others may hoard magical artifacts,
art, or knowledge. Because of their size and large appetite, dragons
tend to be solitary, with territories ranging in size from 20,000 to
100,000 square kilometers (this is equivalent to a circular region with
radius 80 to 180 kilometers). As a consequence, the global dragon
population is around 1000 - 3000 dragons. Dragons will sometimes form
agreements with the humans living in their area, usually something
along the lines of the dragon not attacking their cities in return for
a regular tribute of meat. Dragons usually eat large herd animals such
as deer or sheep, although they may eat humans if given cause to.
Dragons have their own spoken language, but can often speak and write
in a variety of human languages. Many dragons are philosophers and
researchers, devoting a great deal of time to unraveling how some
aspect of the universe works. There have also been a number of dragon
warlords and conquerors who have taken over local human civilizations
over the ages, although these have generally limited their conquests to
within their own territories. Since dragons are solitary and have an
extremely low population density, there is no real dragon civilization,
although some dragons have contributed to the success of certain human
civilizations.
Dragon Subspecies:

  * Plated (Mountain) Dragon
  * Horned (Greater) Dragon
  * Spined Dragon
  * Western (Forest) Dragon
  * Tundra Dragon

## High Elementals

High elementals refer to any elementals that can be considered sentient.

  * Gyldraed
  * Vyldarthe

## Sprites

Short lived, clever, but not highly intelligent (ie. Good 'street
smarts' poor 'book learning'. Natural habitat is bogs, swamps or
marshes. Many sprites make their home in human cities as messengers,
spies, etc.


