---
layout: default
permalink: /world/magic/disciplines/healing
---

# Healing

Healing is the use of magic to heal illness or injuries. Healing primarily uses sympathy, with some transmutation and channeling. Basic healing uses sympathy and transmutation to restore the body to the state it was in before the injury, similar to how shapeshifting works. This is most effective on minor injuries. More complex injures require more effort and guidance on the part of the healer to avoid complications, and as such rely more heavily on channeling and transmutation. 
With basic restoration, any missing, damaged, or misaligned components will take the shortest path to their proper location. Consequently, any complex injuries should be properly aligned before being healed. For example, broken bones may result in bone fragments near veins or vital organs. If basic healing is used, these bone fragments will likely damage their surroundings as they are drawn towards their proper place, and therefore should be properly aligned before the break is healed. Another example would be a knotted intestine, which must be carefully repositioned, as relying on basic healing to align it properly would be as likely to make it more knotted as it would be to repair it. Knowledge of anatomy is very useful for this sort of healing.
Missing limbs can be reattached using mostly basic healing. However, if the missing limb cannot be obtained, then a new limb must be constructed using transmutation. Sympathy can be used to provide a template of this limb from the body of the patient.
Basic healing also has very little effect on disease or poison. It will generally repair any damage that has been caused by the disease, but will not remove the disease or poison from the patients system. The best method of dealing with these cases is to obtain a sample of the disease or poison, and use sympathy on the sample to draw the offending matter from the patient’s body. If this is impossible, sympathy and scrying can be used to distinguish between the patient and the foreign material, and the disease or poison can be drawn out that way. This method becomes increasingly more difficult the longer the disease or poison has been in the patient’s body.
Old injuries, scars, birth defects, and genetic abnormalities are not affected at all by basic healing, as the body of the patient has been in this state for long enough that it registers as the natural form of the patient. These defects must be healed solely using transmutation and channeling to restore the defect to its ideal form. Because of the complexity of living beings, this is incredibly difficult, and requires an encyclopedic knowledge of biology and anatomy. Sympathy and scrying can be used to obtain some sort of template if a person without the defect is available, but correctly restoring the defect is still quite difficult. The difficulty of the healing is direcly proportional to the complexity of the injury: Scars are relatively simple to repair, while conjoined twins are virtually impossible to separate safely.
Most healing involves internal components shifting in unusual ways and can therefore be quite painful to the patient. Consequently, most healers use psionics to temporarily dull the patient’s ability to feel pain while they are being healed.
Mages specializing in Healing are known as Healers and are usually learned mages.